SQL Server access with PKINIT documentation page (#23202)
gravitational/teleport: docs/pages/database-access/guides/sql-server-ad-pkinit.mdx

- A SQL Server network listener configured with a Certificate using Subject Alternative Names
- A Windows machine joined to the same Active Directory domain as the database.
- A Linux node with network access to the Active Directory.

(!docs/pages/includes/tctl.mdx!)

## Step 1/7. Create a Teleport user

(!docs/pages/includes/database-access/create-user.mdx!)

## Step 2/7. Configure a GPO to allow Teleport connections

We need to configure a GPO to allow Teleport database sessions. This includes
telling your computers to trust Teleport's CA and allowing certificate-based
smart card authentication.

### Export Teleport CA and CRL.

The following step requires an existing cluster. If you don't already have a
Teleport cluster up and running, see our general [Getting
Started](../../try-out-teleport/introduction.mdx) guide.

<Admonition type="note" title="Database CA Rotation">
  These steps will need to be repeated if Teleport's database certificate
  authority is rotated.
</Admonition>

1. Get the Teleport database CA certificate by running:

```code
$ tctl auth export --type=db-der > db-ca.cer
```

2. Get the Teleport database CRL by running:

```code

> $ tctl auth crl --type=db > db-ca.crl

Author: Thanks for pointing it out. It will be addressed on #23327.

```

3. Transfer the `db-ca.cer` and `db-ca.crl` files to a Windows machine where you can manage your group policy.

> ### Create a GPO and import the Teleport CA.

Author: It is required, but I'll add it as it reduces the errors users may face due to domain controllers not having the updated policies.

<Admonition type="note" title="Domain Wide Policy">
  For the purposes of this guide, we apply the GPO we are about to create to our
  entire AD domain. In the case where you wish for only a subset of computers
  within your AD domain to be accessible via Teleport, you should apply the GPO
  to an OU that includes only such computers.
</Admonition>

1. Create a GPO with name like `Teleport DB Access`.

```powershell
$GPOName="Teleport DB Access"
New-GPO -Name $GPOName | New-GPLink -Target $((Get-ADDomain).DistinguishedName)
```

2. Again open the `Group Policy Management` program, and on the left pane,
   navigate to `$FOREST > Domains > $DOMAIN > Group Policy Objects`.
3. Right click on the GPO you just made (`Teleport DB Access`), and select `Edit...`.
4. In the group policy editor, select:

```text
Computer Configuration > Policies > Windows Settings > Security Settings > Public Key Policies
```

5. Right click on `Trusted Root Certification Authorities` and select `Import`.

> 6. Click through the wizard, selecting your CA file.

Author: Not sure if I understood it correctly, but having a specific file location here implies how users transferred their CA files to the Windows machine (from the previous step). We could add a note on this, l[ike on the desktop access guide](https://github.com/gravitational/teleport/blob/master/docs/pages/desktop-access/active-directory-manual.mdx?plain=1#L201). What do you think?

> 6. Click through the wizard, selecting your CA file.

Reviewer: Just wonder if we can specify the filename because we have `db-ca.cer` and `db-ca.crl` so at first glance it might be consign because both files have the `-ca` suffix.

</Admonition>

To log out of the database and remove credentials:

```code
$ tsh db logout sqlserver
```

## Troubleshooting

### Teleport CA and CRL not imported correctly.

When connecting to your database, you get an error `Error message: authentication
failed` and Teleport database service logs have the error message `Failed to
authenticate with KDC: kinit: Client not trusted while getting initial
credentials`. This happens when the Teleport Database CA is not imported
correctly or propagated yet. You can force the propagation by running
`certutil -pulse` and trying to connect to your database.

### Invalid KDC hostname.

If you’re connecting to your database and receive the error `Error message:
authentication failed` and on Teleport database service logs, there is the error
entry `Failed to authenticate with KDC: Password for user@AD.TELEPORT.DEV:
\nkinit: Cannot read password while getting initial credentials`, which means
that the KDC hostname is wrong. You can verify your domain controller’s SPN to
see if they’re set correctly and update the value on the field `kdc_hostname` on
your database's configuration.

> ### Teleport cannot verify database CA.

Reviewer: This applies to also to  SQLServer integration with keytab files 
Could we updated the docs and extend the details by SQLServer TLS setup configuration ?

If your database has a CA that Teleport doesn’t know about, it will return the
following error when connecting to it: `Error message: TLS Handshake failed:
x509: certificate signed by unknown authority (possibly because of "x509:
invalid signature: parent certificate cannot sign this kind of certificate"
while trying to verify candidate authority certificate
"SSL_Self_Signed_Fallback")`.

To solve this, you can add the CA configuration to the database like the
following:

```yaml
...
db_service:
  databases:
    - name: sqlserver
      protocol: sqlserver
      tls:
        # Point it to your Database CA PEM certificate.

>         ca_cert_file: "rdsca.pem"

Reviewer: Does this is enough. Most likely SQLServer cert has empty `CN` SANs field and switching to `mode: verify-ca` from ` verify-full` will be needed in most cases.

---

> title: Database Access with Microsoft SQL Server with Active Directory PKINIT authentication (Preview)

Reviewer 2: With the standard `| Teleport Docs` suffix that gets added to the H1, the `title` tag's text is 112 characters. The rule of thumb for SEO is around 60 characters, though I'm not sure how often we follow this. In any case, we should find a way to shorten the title.

Per our style guide, we also use title case in titles, so we should capitalize "authentication"

description: How to configure Teleport Database Access with Microsoft SQL Server with Active Directory PKINIT authentication.
---

<Admonition type="warning" title="Preview">

>   Database Access for Microsoft SQL Server is currently in Preview mode.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  Database access for Microsoft SQL Server is currently in Preview mode.
```
Moving away from describing "Database Access" as a distinct product

</Admonition>

This guide will help you to:

- Install and configure Teleport.
- Set up access to SQL Server using Active Directory PKINIT authentication.
- Connect to SQL Server through Teleport.

<ScopedBlock scope={["oss", "enterprise"]}>
![Teleport Database Access SQL Server Self-Hosted](../../../img/database-access/guides/sqlserver_selfhosted.png)
</ScopedBlock>
<ScopedBlock scope={["cloud"]}>
![Teleport Database Access SQL Server Cloud](../../../img/database-access/guides/sqlserver_cloud.png)
</ScopedBlock>

This guide will focus on SQL Servers using self-hosted Active Directory
authentication.

## Prerequisites

(!docs/pages/includes/edition-prereqs-tabs.mdx!)

- A SQL Server database with Active Directory authentication enabled.

> - A SQL Server network listener configured with a Certificate using Subject Alternative Names

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- A SQL Server network listener configured with a certificate using Subject Alternative Names.
```
- "Certificate" is not a proper noun
- Using consistent punctuation in this list

- A Windows machine joined to the same Active Directory domain as the database.

> - A Linux node with network access to the Active Directory.

Reviewer 2: - Is "the Active Directory" the correct usage here? Would it make more sense to say, "The Active Directory server" or something similar?
- We mention that the Linux node needs to be able to reach Active Directory, but we don't indicate any requirements for Active Directory itself (only Active Directory authentication for SQL Server)

Reviewer 2: Maybe "An Active Directory installation" or something similar?

(!docs/pages/includes/tctl.mdx!)

## Step 1/7. Create a Teleport user

(!docs/pages/includes/database-access/create-user.mdx!)

## Step 2/7. Configure a GPO to allow Teleport connections

We need to configure a GPO to allow Teleport database sessions. This includes
telling your computers to trust Teleport's CA and allowing certificate-based
smart card authentication.

> ### Export Teleport CA and CRL.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Export Teleport CA and CRL
```
We don't use punctuation in headings like this

> The following step requires an existing cluster. If you don't already have a
> Teleport cluster up and running, see our general [Getting
> Started](../../try-out-teleport/introduction.mdx) guide.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```
We already require a Teleport cluster in the Prerequisites

<Admonition type="note" title="Database CA Rotation">

>   These steps will need to be repeated if Teleport's database certificate
>   authority is rotated.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You will need to repeat these steps if you rotate Teleport's database certificate authority.
```
I think the active voice is a easier to read here.

</Admonition>

1. Get the Teleport database CA certificate by running:

```code
$ tctl auth export --type=db-der > db-ca.cer
```

2. Get the Teleport database CRL by running:

```code

> $ tctl auth crl --type=db > db-ca.crl

Author: I wasn't aware of that. We can only download the database CA, but the CRL would still require the `tctl` command. Do you think we should update only the CA download?

> $ tctl auth crl --type=db > db-ca.crl

Reviewer 3: No, if we can't download both directly we may as well be consistent.

```

3. Transfer the `db-ca.cer` and `db-ca.crl` files to a Windows machine where you can manage your group policy.

> ### Create a GPO and import the Teleport CA.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Create a GPO and import the Teleport CA
```

<Admonition type="note" title="Domain Wide Policy">
  For the purposes of this guide, we apply the GPO we are about to create to our
  entire AD domain. In the case where you wish for only a subset of computers
  within your AD domain to be accessible via Teleport, you should apply the GPO

>   to an OU that includes only such computers.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  to an OU that includes only these computers.
```

</Admonition>

> 1. Create a GPO with name like `Teleport DB Access`.

Reviewer 2: Instead of "name like", could we ask the user to use this name for the GPO?

```powershell
$GPOName="Teleport DB Access"
New-GPO -Name $GPOName | New-GPLink -Target $((Get-ADDomain).DistinguishedName)
```

> 2. Again open the `Group Policy Management` program, and on the left pane,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
2. Open the `Group Policy Management` program, and on the left pane,
```

   navigate to `$FOREST > Domains > $DOMAIN > Group Policy Objects`.
3. Right click on the GPO you just made (`Teleport DB Access`), and select `Edit...`.
4. In the group policy editor, select:

```text
Computer Configuration > Policies > Windows Settings > Security Settings > Public Key Policies
```

5. Right click on `Trusted Root Certification Authorities` and select `Import`.
6. Click through the wizard, selecting your CA file (`db-ca.cer`).

<Figure align="left" bordered caption="Import Teleport CA">
  ![Import Teleport CA](../../../img/desktop-access/ca.png)
</Figure>

> ### Enable smart card service.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Enable smart card service
```

> Teleport performs certificate based authentication by emulating a smart card.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Teleport performs certificate-based authentication by emulating a smart card.
```

1. Still editing your `Teleport DB Access`, select:

```text
Computer Configuration > Policies > Windows Settings > Security Settings > System Services
```

2. Double click on `Smart Card`, select `Define this policy setting` and switch
   to `Automatic` then click `OK`.

> <Figure align="left" bordered caption="Enable the Smart Card Service">

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
<Figure align="left" bordered caption="Enable the Smart Card service">
```

  ![Enable Smartcard](../../../img/desktop-access/smartcard.png)
</Figure>

<Admonition type="note" title="gpupdate.exe">
  You will be modifying GPOs, and sometimes GPO modifications can take some time
  to propagate to all hosts. You can force your changes to take effect
  immediately on your current host at any time by opening a PowerShell prompt

>   and running `gpupdate.exe /force` (though their effects may still take time to

Reviewer 2: What does "their" refer to here? All of the GPOs you modified in this guide?

Author: Yes. Should we change it to make it more clear? Also, in this guide, we're only working with a single GPO.

  propagate to other machines on the domain).
</Admonition>

> ### Publish Teleport CA

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Publish the Teleport CA
```

This step enables the domain controllers to trust the Teleport CA, which will

> allow smart card logons via Teleport to succeed.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
allow smart card logins via Teleport to succeed.
```

> On a machine which is joined to your domain and logged in as an account in the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
On a machine that is joined to your domain and logged in as an account in the
```

`Domain Administrators` group, run the two commands below at a PowerShell prompt
to publish the Teleport CA to your Active Directory domain (using the path
to the exported Teleport `db-ca.cer` file that you copied above):

```powershell
certutil –dspublish –f <PathToCertFile.cer> RootCA
certutil -dspublish -f <PathToCertFile.cert> NTAuthCA
```

> ### Publish Teleport CRL

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Publish the Teleport CRL
```

On the same machine, run the command below at a PowerShell promt to publish the
Teleport CRL to your Active Directory domain (using the path to the exported
`db-ca.crl` file that you copied above).

```powershell
certutil -dspublish -f <PathToCRLFile.crl> TeleportDB
```

<Admonition type="tip">

>   To avoid waiting until the certificate propagation, you can force the CA

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  To avoid waiting until the certificate propagates, you can force the CA
```

  retrieval from LDAP after importing the CA and CRL with the command:

  ```powershell
  certutil -pulse
  ```
</Admonition>

> ## Step 3/7. Export LDAP CA certificate

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Step 3/7. Export the LDAP CA certificate
```

To authenticate users, Teleport uses LDAPS. This means that Teleport needs to
know that the certificate sent by the server during the initial SSL connection
is trusted. This is done by specifying the LDAP CA certificate on the database
configuration, but first, we need to export it from your AD. It can be done by

> running the following PowerShell script on your Windows instance:

Reviewer 2: - I think the "but first" in the middle of this paragraph makes it a bit harder to follow. Is there a way to describe the first step first?
- This paragraph should use [active voice](https://www.grammarly.com/blog/active-vs-passive-voice/) for clarity. Instead of "it can be done", for example, describe who/what is performing the action.

```powershell
$WindowsDERFile = $env:TEMP + "\windows.der"
$WindowsPEMFile = $env:TEMP + "\windows.pem"
certutil "-ca.cert" $WindowsDERFile 
certutil -encode $WindowsDERFile $WindowsPEMFile

$CA_CERT_PEM = Get-Content -Path $WindowsPEMFile
Write-Output $CA_CERT_PEM

Remove-Item $WindowsDERFile -Recurse
Remove-Item $WindowsPEMFile -Recurse
```

The script will write the LDAP CA contents in PEM format to the terminal, and
from there, you can copy and use it on your database configuration.

## Step 4/7. Set up the Teleport Database Service

(!docs/pages/includes/database-access/token.mdx!)

Install Teleport on the host where you will run the Teleport Database Service:

(!docs/pages/includes/install-linux.mdx!)

> <Admonition type="note">

Reviewer 2: I don't think we need to wrap this in an `Admonition` tag, since it's body text that we expect all users to follow.

Reviewer 2: I think we should standardize on "Database Service" to be clear that this is a Teleport product name (i.e., a proper noun) and not just any service running a database

  Teleport Database Service must run on a Linux server with the `kinit` command
  installed with PKINIT extensions.

  <Tabs>
    <TabItem label="Ubuntu">
      ```code
      $ sudo apt-get update
      $ sudo apt-get -y install krb5-user krb5-pkinit
      ```
    </TabItem>
    <TabItem label="RHEL / CentOS 7">
      ```code
      $ sudo yum -y update
      $ sudo yum -y install krb5-workstation krb5-pkinit
      ```
    </TabItem>
  </Tabs>
</Admonition>

Copy the join token to a file on the instance where you will run the Database

> Service, and then use the following configuration:

Reviewer 2: We should be explicit about which fields in the example configuration we expect users to edit.

```yaml
version: v3
teleport:
  auth_token: abcd123-insecure-do-not-use-this
  proxy_server: teleport.example.com:443

auth_service:
  enabled: no
ssh_service:
  enabled: no
proxy_service:
  enabled: no

db_service:
  enabled: "yes"
  databases:
    - name: my-sqlserver
      protocol: sqlserver
      uri: SQL-SERVER-INSTANCE.ad.teleport.dev:1433
      ad:
        # Active Directory domain (Kerberos realm) that SQL Server is joined.
        domain: ad.teleport.dev
        # Service Principal Name for SQL Server to fetch Kerberos tickets for.
        spn: MSSQLSvc/SQL-SERVER-INSTANCE.ad.teleport.dev:1433
        # The SPN of the domain controller responsible for providing the LDAP CA.
        kdc_host_name: DOMAIN-CONTROLLER.ad.teleport.dev
        # Place the LDAP CA contents generated above.
        ldap_cert: |
          -----BEGIN CERTIFICATE-----
          ...
          -----END CERTIFICATE-----
```

<Admonition type="tip">
  You can look SPNs up in the Attribute Editor of the Active Directory Users and
  Computers dialog on your AD-joined Windows machine.

>   If you don't see Attribute Editor tab, make sure that "View > Advanced Features"

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  If you don't see the Attribute Editor tab, make sure that the "View > Advanced Features"
```

Log in to your Teleport cluster. Your SQL Server database should appear in the
list of available databases:

<ScopedBlock scope={["oss", "enterprise"]}>

```code
$ tsh login --proxy=teleport.example.com --user=alice
$ tsh db ls
# Name      Description         Labels
# --------- ------------------- -------
# sqlserver                     env=dev
```

</ScopedBlock>
<ScopedBlock scope={["cloud"]}>

```code
$ tsh login --proxy=mytenant.teleport.sh --user=alice
$ tsh db ls
# Name      Description         Labels
# --------- ------------------- -------
# sqlserver                     env=dev
```

</ScopedBlock>

To retrieve credentials for a database and connect to it:

```code
$ tsh db connect --db-user=teleport sqlserver
```

<Admonition type="note">
  The `mssql-cli` command-line client should be available in `PATH` of the machine
  you're running `tsh db connect` from.  
  
  `mssql-cli` is not required for SQL Server connections.  Use `tsh proxy db --db-user=teleport --tunnel sqlserver`
   to connect from other DB Clients such as Microsoft SQL Server Management Studio.
</Admonition>

To log out of the database and remove credentials:

```code
$ tsh db logout sqlserver
```

> ## Troubleshooting

Reviewer 2: We should remove the punctuation after each H3-level header in this section

### Teleport CA and CRL not imported correctly.

When connecting to your database, you get an error `Error message: authentication

> failed` and Teleport database service logs have the error message `Failed to
> authenticate with KDC: kinit: Client not trusted while getting initial
> credentials`. This happens when the Teleport Database CA is not imported
> correctly or propagated yet. You can force the propagation by running
> `certutil -pulse` and trying to connect to your database.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
failed` and Teleport Database Service logs have the error message `Failed to
authenticate with KDC: kinit: Client not trusted while getting initial
credentials`. This happens when the Teleport Database CA is not imported
correctly or propagated yet. You can force the propagation by running
`certutil -pulse` and trying to connect to your database.
```

### Invalid KDC hostname.

If you’re connecting to your database and receive the error `Error message:

> authentication failed` and on Teleport database service logs, there is the error

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
authentication failed` and on Teleport Database Service logs, there is the error
```

entry `Failed to authenticate with KDC: Password for user@AD.TELEPORT.DEV:
\nkinit: Cannot read password while getting initial credentials`, which means
that the KDC hostname is wrong. You can verify your domain controller’s SPN to
see if they’re set correctly and update the value on the field `kdc_hostname` on
your database's configuration.

### Teleport cannot verify database CA.

If your database has a CA that Teleport doesn’t know about, it will return the
following error when connecting to it: `Error message: TLS Handshake failed:
x509: certificate signed by unknown authority (possibly because of "x509:
invalid signature: parent certificate cannot sign this kind of certificate"
while trying to verify candidate authority certificate
"SSL_Self_Signed_Fallback")`.

> To solve this, you can add the CA configuration to the database like the
> following:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To solve this, you can add the following configuration to your Teleport Database Service instance:
```

> ```yaml

Reviewer 2: We should be explicit about the change this is proposing. Otherwise, users need to compare this code snippet to the `db_service` snippet earlier in the guide and figure it out.

Author: I've changed the code section to `diff` and marked the changed lines. What do you think?

  subgraph ad [ ]
  direction TB
  style ad fill:none,stroke:none
    e[(SQL Servers)]
    d{Active Directory Users}
  end
  c-->d
  c-->e
  e-->d
end
```*/}
</ScopedBlock>
<ScopedBlock scope={["cloud"]}>
![Teleport Database Access SQL Server Cloud](../../../img/database-access/guides/sqlserver_cloud.png)
{/*```mermaid
%%{ init: { 'flowchart': { 'curve': 'stepBefore' } } }%%
graph LR
a(Users)
b[Teleport Cloud Tenant]
style b fill: #844cff,color: #ffffff
a-->b
b-->c
subgraph local [Private Network]
style local fill:#C0C0C0,stroke: #000000
  c[Teleport DB Service]
  style c fill: #a379ff,color: #ffffff
  subgraph ad [ ]
  direction TB
  style ad fill:none,stroke:none
    e[(SQL Servers)]
    d{Active Directory Users}
  end
  c-->d
  c-->e
  e-->d
end
```*/}
</ScopedBlock>

This guide will focus on SQL Servers using self-hosted Active Directory
authentication.

## Prerequisites

(!docs/pages/includes/edition-prereqs-tabs.mdx!)

- A SQL Server database with Active Directory authentication enabled.
- A SQL Server network listener configured with a certificate using Subject Alternative Names.
- A Windows machine joined to the same Active Directory domain as the database.

> - A Linux node with network access to the Active Directory.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- A Linux node with network access to Active Directory.
```

   ```

5. Right click on `Trusted Root Certification Authorities` and select `Import`.

6. Click through the wizard, selecting your CA file (`db-ca.cer`).

<Figure align="left" bordered caption="Import Teleport CA">
  ![Import Teleport CA](../../../img/desktop-access/ca.png)
</Figure>

### Enable smart card service

Teleport performs certificate-based authentication by emulating a smart card.

1. Still editing your `Teleport DB Access`, select:

   ```text
   Computer Configuration > Policies > Windows Settings > Security Settings > System Services
   ```

2. Double click on `Smart Card`, select `Define this policy setting` and switch
   to `Automatic` then click `OK`.

<Figure align="left" bordered caption="Enable the Smart Card service">
  ![Enable Smartcard](../../../img/desktop-access/smartcard.png)
</Figure>

<Admonition type="note" title="gpupdate.exe">
  You will be modifying GPOs, and sometimes GPO modifications can take some time
  to propagate to all hosts. You can force your changes to take effect
  immediately on your current host at any time by opening a PowerShell prompt

>   and running `gpupdate.exe /force` (though their effects may still take time to

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  and running `gpupdate.exe /force` (though the effects of your changes may still take time to
```

  ```powershell
  certutil -pulse
  ```
</Admonition>

## Step 3/7. Export the LDAP CA certificate

Teleport uses LDAPS to authenticate users, which requires specifying the LDAP CA
certificate on the database configuration. To ensure that Teleport trusts the
certificate sent by the server during the initial SSL connection, you must export
the certificate from your AD. You can export the certificate by running the
following PowerShell script on your Windows instance:

```powershell
$WindowsDERFile = $env:TEMP + "\windows.der"
$WindowsPEMFile = $env:TEMP + "\windows.pem"
certutil "-ca.cert" $WindowsDERFile 
certutil -encode $WindowsDERFile $WindowsPEMFile

$CA_CERT_PEM = Get-Content -Path $WindowsPEMFile
Write-Output $CA_CERT_PEM

Remove-Item $WindowsDERFile -Recurse
Remove-Item $WindowsPEMFile -Recurse
```

The script will write the LDAP CA contents in PEM format to the terminal, and
from there, you can copy and use it on your database configuration.

## Step 4/7. Set up the Teleport Database Service

(!docs/pages/includes/database-access/token.mdx!)

Install Teleport on the host where you will run the Teleport Database Service:

(!docs/pages/includes/install-linux.mdx!)

> Teleport Database Service must run on a Linux server with the `kinit` command

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The Teleport Database Service must run on a Linux server with the `kinit` command
```

> Teleport Database Service must run on a Linux server with the `kinit` command

Reviewer 2: I think we should indicate in the Prerequisites that the host where you'll run the Database Service needs to have `kinit` installed. That way, the user can be confident that their environment is ready for this guide after finishing that section
